---
layout: post
title:  "COVID-19 and Climate Change: A Letter to High School Social Scientist"
date:   2020-03-25 08:00:00 +0100
categories: teach
---

*The following Essay was sent to a high-schooler class for a six-session \"Why haven\'t we solved Climate Change yet?\" class; It, like many other things, was canceled due to the COVID-19 health emergency.*

Dear class,

two weeks and a revolutionary change of how our world feels and acts
later, I continue what Lukas began with a second essay on \"Why haven\'t
we solved climate change yet?\"
<!--more-->
Given the resources that many countries spend in the fight against
COVID-19, it might seem that global action is possible now, also action
against climate change. In the following, I show you a *model*, a
simplified rule of how the world works, that explains what about
fighting climate change is so hard. In the second part, I show that
these challenges might hold to a lesser extent for action against
COVID-19.

Ok, here is our model:

## If desirable actions are costly and provide a positive externality, then they will be underprovided


Wow, that\'s a complicated sentence. Therefore, I reserved the next five
paragraphs to parse it for you.

Let us get into the first word that might be unclear in this sentence.
When is an action desirable, and when is it costly? Here is how you can
test whether an action is costly to you: Imagine that a good fairy
approached you and told you that it could make a thing real without you
doing anything. If (a) would you want that (b) you sometimes prefer not
to do it (the second fails mostly for breathing: You *have to* breathe),
then the action is desirable and costly. Take a group project as an
example. Having all work done is a wish you might want to tell to a
fairy (that checks a), but still, in the real world, it turns out, you
might not work as much on a group project (that checks b). Hence,
working on a group project is a desirable, costly action. So are many
things in this world: Healthy eating (giving up the donuts :( ), action
against climate change, quarantine against COVID-19.

Let us come to the second word in the sentence that could be unclear.
What are externalities? An externality is an effect of an action on
others you might not account for in your decision-making. There might be
several reasons for not-accounting, depending on the scenario. You might
be under such a pressure yourself that you might not care (COVID-19). Or
you might by legal construction not care (as companies that need to
\"maximize shareholder value\" on stock exchanges). Yet another example
is if you forget to think about others (group projects), or because of
\"party mode\"
([[https://www.cbsnews.com/news/spring-break-party-coronavirus-pandemic-miami-beaches/]{.underline}](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/spring-break-party-coronavirus-pandemic-miami-beaches/)).

The third part that might be unclear is underprovision. For this, we
first need to find what \"provision\" means. The provision of action is
how much everyone together did this action. Let us come back to the
example of your group project. Several members of the group could work
on it. The provision of this action is then the work of all members of
the group together.

Now we can say when something is underprovided. A weak and credible
criterion for something being *underprovided* or not enough provided,
if, when everyone did more of one action, *everyone* could be happier.

So why is it that desirable costly actions are underprovided in the
presence of externalities? Let\'s again go back to your group project.
If there is one person that really really wants a good grade (and you
know this; probably you had such a situation already), then you could
think at each day: I could work one more hour, or I could wait a bit
more and let *them* do the work. You only work if one more hour of your
work pays off for you, not pays off in total. If everyone worked a bit
more on the project, we could all be happier, but everyone on their own
would prefer to work less. If you work less, we (Economists and other
people thinking about groups) call this you taking a free ride on
someone else. In the extreme, this results in only one person working,
and it is stressful for all. If all of you worked, you would all be
happier. Therefore, the action is underprovided. This \"free rider
phenomenon\" we see again quite frequently: Nations that think they will
not be struck by climate change might not invest in sustainable
technologies. Also, countries could not invest in fighting COVID-19 and
let other countries do the work.

But, wait: Countries are spending like crazy on fighting COVID-19! Is
our model *wrong*? Let\'s see what we might be missing and compare the
fight against climate change and COVID-19.

## But wait: Countries are spending like crazy on fighting COVID-19. Is the model wrong?

Let us first be sure that in both actions against climate change and
COVID-19, we can apply our model. In both cases, action is costly --- if
there were a fairy that could effectively contain COVID-19 or make
energy plants clean, we would take it, but, still, action is not
unlimited in the real world. Hence, action in both cases is costly and
desirable. Acting against COVID-19 and climate change also has an
externality. Research on renewables would help other countries fight
climate change and, say, quarantine against COVID-19 would bring less
infected persons into other countries, both of which do not have a
direct effect on the country that conducts the research. Hence, the
if-part of our sentence is satisfied, and the then part follows.

The provision of action against climate change and COVID are very
different, though. This disparity does not mean that our model is wrong.
The model might only identify crucial features of only *one* of the
stories. We claim it does \-- for climate change.

Both the costs and the externality are small compared to the
self-interest of countries in the case of COVID-19. The size differences
make the effect that our model predicts negligibly small. Costs of *not*
fighting COVID-19, such as closing down universities and schools and
laying off people because of a more substantial outbreak, are humongous.
Despite the effect of action against COVID-19 coming with some delay,
the expected *local* impact is significant and likely to be experienced
within weeks. Hence, the cost of action is small compared to how
desirable it is (the situation is terrible very soon if one does not
act), and also the externality on other countries is small compared to
the local effect.

The situation is different for action against climate change. Within
weeks or months, action against climate change is barely noticeable.
Hence, if politicians and the electorate are interested in periods of
months, and not of decades, the action against climate change might be
pretty costly compared to the perceivable benefit. The small perceptible
benefit also makes the externality relatively strong. Hence, our model
might not predict reality well if the action is too desirable for
oneself \-- it might happen *despite externality and costs*.

What can we learn from the above discussion? We formulated a concise
rule/a model in if-then shape, which seems to explain why action against
climate change happens less than would be optimal. Action against
COVID-19, however, differs in the importance of parts of our model.
Acting is much more desirable compared to the cost and the
externality/effect on others. And, indeed, in contrast to our model\'s
prediction, there is a lot of action against COVID-19. As an Economist
(Harrod) puts it: \"Economics is the Science of selecting models
relevant to the contemporary world.\" We saw a model that fits one
situation well and not another, and with that already have seen an
essential part of what researching in (quantitative) social sciences is like: Selecting the right models.
